Entrepreneurial organizations
motivation
In an entrepreneurial organization every employee carries an entrepreneurial spirit in their day-to-day organizational life. Their thinking, work and outlook reflect an entrepreneurial thinking. Creativity, ability to risk and explore new methods of approach, freedom to differ and express opinions for the welfare of the organisation, ability to ask, learn and enjoy the work at all levels of employment are hall marks of an entrepreneurial organisation.

Every business serves a purpose in the market. The difference between an entrepreneur organising a business through a structure and an entrepreneurial organization is simple. Usually an entrepreneur invents a product, markets it, and constructs a business structure to increase revenue for all stake holders in the long run. It is a one man show. However, many such organisations do not survive beyond the life time of the entrepreneur. The vision of the entrepreneur gets diluted and the structure he built is no longer able to weather the dynamic changes in the market. The employees of the organisation do not have the skill or expertise to run the business, because either the entrepreneur kept his cards close to his chest or is unwilling to be flexible in the ever changing market scenario.

The business succeeded because of personality of the owner and when these personalities lose their charm and control, their organization also lose their market credibility. We can come to terms with such closures of organization as part of evolution - what was created will end. However, there are organizations which constantly create new purposes and support different personalities and their evolving expressions. The organisation functions like a relay race ensuring the continuity of the entity and improve its ability to thrive and survive. Any organization that can reinvent itself, align to the market, keep growing and evolving its potentials could represent an entrepreneurial organization.

Often, to respond to changing markets, organizations create a reporting structure to manage a team efficiently. Such structure is intended by the leadership to closely monitor growth, provide resource to enhance performance, keep tab on competitor and ensure a smooth operational process. As the organisations sense an initial change with the new structure, more levels are added to the structure keeping efficiency in mind. This in turn leads to creating distance between the levels of employees. This distance paves way for bureaucracy with concentrated power structures with political undertones. Soon the organization gets trapped in its own structure, and creativity and innovation are replaced by operating procedures and processes. Bureaucracy takes over and it is no longer human beings who are thinking through their work but robots who follow instructions. As a business coach my focus has been to free the organization from such rigid self-sabotaging pattern.

It is a common rhetoric today that employees are not what they used to be fifteen twenty years ago. The new generations are unwilling to fit into an hierarchical bureaucratic structure prevalent earlier. Today the focus is on humanizing work, humanocracy as opposed to bureaucracy. An organisation which follows humanocracy provides space for efficiency and empathy. The future work culture needs to be a combination of empathy, efficiency and entrepreneurship in all positions. Every employee will have to focus on revenue models which will bring value to their organization. Additionally when every individual can have a space and freedom for innovation at work, then the organization will be able to reinvent itself.

I have been able to create such entrepreneurial organizations and create a strategy in developing entrepreneurial organisation. The key area in coaching is to focus coaching work at the space of in-betweenness. A senior organizational change pioneer Mee-Yan Cheung-Judge in her book “A practitioners guide for organizational development” refers to the significance of in-between-ness. She writes, “we have many tools to assess and develop individual performance but what we lack is how to develop the in-between-ness where people can show a collective performance”.

Bernd Schmid (Dr) my mentor and founder of Isb Germany lists 5 perspectives which will help in developing an entrepreneurial organization.
The 5 perspectives are:
1. shared reality
2. shared strategy
3. shared performance
4. shared responsibility
5. shared leadership.

I focus on the in-between-ness as shown in the diagram below.

In the above representation our coaching is done in the in-between space. How do we work in the in-between space? The people working together in the chain of responsibility are coached together. In my experience of over a decade, when the entire chain learn together, they understand the requirements of people in different roles hence develop empathy and efficiency. Many organizations provide coaching for individuals but do not know that its important to coach the people who are part of the chain of responsibilities together for any impactful change to be seen. Individual coaching may change an individual and his approach but does not break the silo effect. A change in an individual cannot change his whole department or the organisation. When the coaching caters to the in-between-ness then a shared reality emerges which can be addressed with shared strategy, shared performance, shared responsibility and shared leadership. This shared space lowers bureaucracy and domination of hierarchy. Now every employee is travelling together and not in silos – as my target, my bonus, my promotion etc. Humanocracy through shared space paves way for collective growth.

I share an example of a business coaching scenario, where I worked on the in-betweeness. The business had sustained losses over past years and was on the verge of closing. We started work with two teams. The participants were from the corporate and the city operations. An integration of global and local requirements was the focus of the business coaching. After building a shared understanding, as the coach I asked the corporate team to share what they want to achieve by the end of the year and outline the areas where they are dependent on the city team to achieve their goals. After listening to the corporate team, the city team also shared what they have planned to achieve and stated their dependency on the corporate. As the meeting progressed, both the leadership shared their inter dependency from a space of humility as they realised that they must become mutually dependable partners if they were to achieve the set goals / revenue for the organization. Towards the end of the meeting, a base of mutuality and trust began to emerge as a visible mood. This led to the organization having same structure minus the hierarchy attitude. This change is depicted below. The other teams were also included and through regular coaching, many issues were ironed out in the environment of mutuality and trust. The organisation had begun its journey towards growth.

When the organization starts working as a flat structure the mutual exchange becomes the culture fostering innovation, strategic, managerial and executive thinking in all levels than containing such thinking only to designations. Such combination of thinking is part of entrepreneurship. When such entrepreneurship is supported, every employee adds to the bottom line of the organization.

An entrepreneurial functioning organization will look like the diagram below.

When employees feel that they could contribute additional revenue and feel they are making a meaningful contribution within a structure, they function like they are entrepreneurs within the organizational structure. The focus of entrepreneurial organization is collective innovation, strategy, managerial and executive thinking developed at all level. Such collective empathetic, efficient entrepreneurial spirit in action can increase revenue and such an organization is prepared to reinvent itself as many times as required.